GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: North
Korea claims it has successfully
tested a
hydrogen bomb, as the White
House and world
leaders condemn the attempt.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
how South Dakotans are fighting
back against
payday loans with sky-high
interest rates
that leave many in a cycle of
debt.
STEVE HILDEBRAND, South Dakotans
for Responsible
Lending: I have had employee
after employee
after employee over the last
three years in
the coffee shop, going through
horrible, horrible
financial experiences, taking
out these emergency
loans.
GWEN IFILL: And a MacArthur
grant winner who
designs and builds furniture for
those with
disabilities.
ALEX TRUESDELL, Founder,
Adaptive Design Association:
It makes the child, one, believe
in their
own capacity, and then everyone
who knows
and loves the child believe in
what they're
able to do.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The earth rumbled
today in North
Korea with a big bang that shook
capitals
around the world. The communist
regime declared
it had carried out a
thermonuclear explosion,
which, if it turns out to be
true, would represent
a quantum leap beyond anything
it's managed
before.
The nuclear news was trumpeted
on North Korean
state television.
WOMAN (through translator): The
first hydrogen
bomb test was successfully
conducted at 10:00
on January 6, 2016.
GWEN IFILL: State TV also showed
photos of
the North Korean leader, Kim
Jong-un, signing
orders for what it called a
hydrogen bomb
test. But the announcement
broadcast on big
screens in the capital,
Pyongyang, was quickly
condemned around the world,
especially in
China, the North's last major
ally.
HUA CHUNYING, Spokeswoman,
Chinese Ministry
of Foreign Affairs (through
translator): Today,
North Korea carried out a
nuclear bomb test
once again, despite the
international community's
objections. The Chinese
government firmly
opposes this. To fulfill
denuclearization,
nuclear nonproliferation, peace
and stability
on the Korean Peninsula is
China's firm stance.
GWEN IFILL: Whether it was
really a hydrogen
bomb was also widely questioned,
especially
in neighboring South Korea.
LEE CHEOL-WOO, South Korean
National Assembly
(through translator): Judging
from the measurements,
it probably falls short of being
a hydrogen
bomb, although North Korea
claims it is a
hydrogen bomb.
GWEN IFILL: In Washington, White
House spokesman
Josh Earnest said the U.S. is
skeptical too.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The initial analysis that's been
conducted
of the events that were reported
overnight
is not consistent with North
Korean claims
of hydrogen bomb test. There's
nothing that's
occurred in the last 24 hours
that's caused
the United States government to
change our
assessment of North Korea's
technical and
military capabilities.
GWEN IFILL: Meanwhile, Japan's
government
immediately sent an aircraft out
to collect
air particles for radiation
analysis.
A working hydrogen bomb would be
hundreds
of times more powerful than what
North Korea
detonated in three earlier
underground tests.
And, if miniaturized, it might
fit on a missile,
as the communist regime claims.
Pyongyang has long sought to
develop missiles
that could reach the Western
United States.
The U.N. Security Council
branded the test
a clear threat to international
peace and
security and it pledged to
pursue additional
sanctions.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon:
BAN KI-MOON, United Nations
Secretary-General:
This act is profoundly
destabilizing for regional
security and seriously
undermines international
nonproliferation efforts. I
condemn it unequivocally.
GWEN IFILL: And U.S.
presidential candidates
weighed in, with Democrat
Hillary Clinton
calling for new sanctions as
well, and Republican
Ted Cruz saying the test showed
the folly
of failed Democratic policies.
A number of sanctions are
already in place
against North Korea, an isolated
nation with
more than 12 million people
living in extreme
poverty.
We will examine North Korea's
claims about
today's test, and what it all
means, after
the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in the day's
other news,
the chief justice of Alabama's
highest court
urged local officials to deny
marriage licenses
to same-sex couples. That's
despite the U.S.
Supreme Court's decision in June
to legalize
gay marriage nationwide.
State Chief Justice Roy Moore
said the Supreme
Court decision is at odds with
his court's
earlier rulings and is causing
-- quote -- "confusion
and uncertainty." Moore stopped
short of directly
ordering Alabama officials not
to issue licenses.
GWEN IFILL: For the 62nd time,
the Republican-led
House has voted to repeal
President Obama's
health care law. But this time,
it's going
all the way to his desk. House
Speaker Paul
Ryan conceded Congress won't be
able to override
a promised veto, but he said
it's worth the
effort anyway.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
We are confronting the president
with the
hard, honest truth: Obamacare
doesn't work.
Higher premiums and fewer
choices and restricted
access, these are not signs of
success. Obamacare
is not successful. They are
signs of failure,
and the American people deserve
better.
GWEN IFILL: The Senate already
passed the
repeal measure, which also cuts
funding for
Planned Parenthood. But
Massachusetts Congressman
Jim McGovern and other Democrats
said it's
wrong-headed and a waste of
time.
REP. JIM MCGOVERN (D),
Massachusetts: I can't
understand how you can get up
every morning
and go to work and that's your
mission, to
make it more difficult for
people in this
country, to throw 22 million
people off the
health insurance rolls, to make
it more difficult
for vulnerable women to get
preventative care
at Planned Parenthood. That's
the mission.
That's how we're beginning this
new year.
GWEN IFILL: The bill would
eliminate the requirement
that most people obtain health
coverage, and
it would curb the expansion of
Medicaid, as
well as the taxes imposed to pay
for the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The man who
bought the rifles
used in the San Bernardino
shootings pleaded
not guilty today in a federal
court in California.
Enrique Marquez is accused of
conspiring to
aid terrorists, among other
charges. His friend
Syed Farook and Farook's wife,
Tashfeen Malik,
shot 14 people to death at a
holiday party
in December. Marquez goes on
trial next month.
GWEN IFILL: There's evidence
today that years
of drug violence in Mexico has
actually cut
life expectancy in the last
decade. Research
in the journal "Health Affairs"
finds the
projected life span of Mexican
men fell by
more than seven months between
2005 and 2010;
50,000 people died during that
period in Mexico's
war with drug cartels.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraq is offering
to mediate
the diplomatic dispute between
Saudi Arabia
and Iran. The Saudis' Sunni
regime cut off
relations with Shiite Iran last
weekend, after
attacks on Saudi diplomatic
sites in Tehran
and elsewhere. That followed
Riyadh's execution
of a top Shiite cleric.
In Tehran today, Iraq's foreign
minister,
Ibrahim Al-Jaafari, met with his
Iranian counterpart
and talked of finding a way to
restore calm.
IBRAHIM AL-JAAFARI, Iraqi
Foreign Minister
(through translator): Iraq is at
the heart
of the region, and we have
sought to use our
broad relations with Arab
countries and other
countries so that Iraq can play
its role and
alleviate tensions between Iran
and Saudi
Arabia. We have been active from
the early
moments to prevent a disaster
from happening
that could affect the entire
region.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Iraq's Shiite-led
government
has relied on Iran for help
fighting Islamic
State forces. Separately today,
the White
House said President Obama spoke
by phone
with Iraqi Prime Minister Haider
al-Abadi
on their -- quote -- "mutual
concern" about
the situation.
GWEN IFILL: Germany now says a
record 1.1
million people sought asylum
there last year.
About two-thirds of the migrants
came from
Syria, Afghanistan and Iraq.
As the numbers came out, German
Chancellor
Angela Merkel told reporters --
quote -- "It
is very important that we
achieve both a noticeable
reduction in the flow of
refugees and maintain
open borders inside Europe."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, Republican
presidential candidate Ted Cruz
dismissed
questions from rival Donald
Trump about his
being born in Canada. The Texas
senator said
it's settled law that having at
least one
American parent makes you a U.S.
citizen,
even if you are born abroad.
Cruz's mother
is American, his father Cuban.
GWEN IFILL: A Texas grand jury
has indicted
a state trooper in the Sandra
Bland case,
the woman who died in jail after
a traffic
stop in July. Brian Encinia will
face misdemeanor
county of perjury for allegedly
lying about
how he removed Bland from her
car. The grand
jury declined to charge anyone
with Bland's
death.
A major federal assessment finds
a leading
class of insecticides can be
harmful to honeybees
in some crops. The Environmental
Protection
Agency says neonicotinoids pose
a significant
risk to honeybees on cotton and
citrus crops,
but not on corn and berries.
Today's report
is the first of four planned by
the EPA as
it decides whether to ban the
insecticide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the bears
were back in
charge today on Wall Street
after oil prices
plunged again and worries built
about China's
slowdown, as well as North
Korea's weapons
test. The Dow Jones industrial
average lost
252 points to close at 16906.
The Nasdaq fell
55, and the S&P 500 dropped 26.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a deeper
look at North Korea's power
play; why Americans
are buying more and bigger cars;
efforts to
cap sky-interest rates on payday
loans; and
much more.
GWEN IFILL: We return now to
North Korea's
bombshell claims today.
Siegfried Hecker is former
director of Los
Alamos National Laboratory, and
he now teaches
at Stanford University. He has
visited North
Korea and its nuclear facilities
seven times.
And Wendy Sherman was
undersecretary of state
for political affairs during the
Obama administration.
During the Clinton
administration, she was
a State Department official
focused on North
Korea. And she now advises the
Hillary Clinton
campaign.
Wendy Sherman, how much of a
threat is this
latest test?
WENDY SHERMAN, Former U.S.
Undersecretary
of State for Political Affairs:
Well, I think
the fact that North Korea has
now conducted
a fourth nuclear test is of
concern.
I agree with the White House's
assessment,
at least so far -- and I will be
glad to hear
what Mr. Hecker has to say --
that this isn't
a hydrogen test, but,
nonetheless, four nuclear
tests is a concern to us.
GWEN IFILL: So, the fact of the
test is more
concerning to you than the type
of test?
WENDY SHERMAN: Well, no. Had it
been a hydrogen
bomb -- and, of course, it will
still be several
days before we know that for
sure -- that
is much, much, much more
powerful.
And, of course, we're also
concerned about
miniaturization of the weapon,
so that it
might be carried on a weapon to
South Korea,
or Japan or even to the United
States. So,
I this is an acceleration and
escalation by
North Korea. And I think that
the United States
and the world community need to
act with resolve.
GWEN IFILL: Siegfried Hecker,
tell us, what
exactly is possible for North
Korea to have
pulled off in this case?
SIEGFRIED HECKER, Former
Director, Los Alamos
National Laboratory: Well, it's
not clear
exactly what they did.
As Ms. Sherman pointed out, they
did another
nuclear test. And, actually, my
greatest concern
is that they did the fourth
nuclear test.
With that nuclear test, they
clearly achieved
greater sophistication, in most
likelihood
meaning being able to make the
bomb smaller,
lighter, and, therefore, have
greater reach,
if they're able to get them on a
missile.
Whether it was a hydrogen test
or not, we
don't know. My sense is, we will
probably
never really know. So far, from
what is the
information that's there, it
appears the size
of the blast, in other words,
the power from
the seismic signal that can be
measured, it's
about the same level as the
third nuclear
test in 2013, which we put at
the level of
approximately a Hiroshima bomb.
That's saying
10 to 15 kilotons.
Now, whether it actually
achieved the sophistication
of going to a fusion bomb --
that is, the
normal bombs are fission or
atomic bombs -- the
fusion or hydrogen bomb, that is
a very big
step technologically. And it's
not clear that
that was done, but we also can't
rule out
that the North Koreans have made
a significant
advancement.
GWEN IFILL: Wendy Sherman, we
talked about
the U.S. reaction. Let's walk
through some
of the other intersectional
reaction, especially
China.
In the past, they have been as
protective
of North Korea as any nation.
Not so today.
WENDY SHERMAN: Right.
Well, today, they said they are
resolutely
opposed to what North Korea has
done. Now
we need some resolute action
from China as
well. It is significant and
useful that the
U.N. Security Council held an
emergency session.
The reports out of that session
are that nobody
objected to further sanctions.
And Ambassador
Power, the U.S. ambassador,
called for more
sanctions.
And many candidates today who
are running
for president have called for
greater action.
And Secretary Clinton, who
certainly understands
what's happening in Asia, has
called for greater
sanctions and to ensure, as I
think we all
feel, that we not allow North
Korea to blackmail
the international community, but
that we take
resolute action to tell them,
this is not
acceptable.
GWEN IFILL: Siegfried Hecker,
let's talk about
resolute action for a moment. A
year ago,
the president signed an
executive order to
freeze assets in North Korea.
Everyone, as Wendy Sherman
pointed out, is
calling for resolute action,
universal condemnation.
What difference does that make
for a rogue
state like North Korea?
SIEGFRIED HECKER: Quite frankly,
I think none,
because we have been through
this at least
since 2003 or so, when North
Korea pulled
out of a nonproliferation
treaty.
And the attempts, not only by
the United States,
but by the international
community, has been,
in essence, to threaten North
Korea, to sanction
North Korea, to isolate North
Korea. And it
simply hasn't worked. I think we
failed to
engage North Korea appropriately
when we had
opportunities in these last 12
or 13 years.
Whatever engagement was there
didn't work.
The bottom line is, over this
time, from 2003,
when they most likely built
their first primitive
device which they tested in
2006, until today,
they have gone from building a
device, 2003,
testing one that didn't work so
well in 2006,
to just now where they had the
fourth test,
the successful test.
And, in the meantime, at the
same time, they
have scaled up their ability to
make more
bombs. And so where we used to
have a problem
of having this country that
could perhaps
build a simple nuclear device,
today, they
appear to have a nuclear
arsenal. That's of
great concern.
And, to me, that means we have
to do something
different than what's been done
over the last
12 years.
GWEN IFILL: Wendy Sherman, we
know that Kim
Jong-un is a tough read. Not
many people have
gotten inside and figured out
what he's really
up to. But if from -- based on
what we know,
if what he was trying to do
today was provoke,
what was that provocation
intended to do?
WENDY SHERMAN: Well, I think
he's -- it's
several things.
First of all, it's really to
bring together
his own country to believe that
he is strong
and powerful. He is still a
young leader.
He's trying to consolidate his
power. He's
done that through a tyrannical
set of actions,
including killing off some of
his closest
advisers, when he thought they
were getting
out of control and he wasn't
being seen as
primary.
So this was a way to bring his
country together,
which we find completely
reprehensible, but,
nonetheless, he's taken that
action. Second,
he's sending a message to the
region and to
the United States that he will
do whatever
he thinks he needs to do to
protect his country.
He will not go down, as other
leaders have
gone down around the world.
I take Sieg's statements, and I
understand
them, the frustration here to
get North Korea
to do something, but to get
action takes a
couple of things. It takes a
leader who is
willing to engage. And North
Korea has not
been willing to engage, though
the United
States and others have made many
entreaties
to them to do so.
And, secondly, I think we have
to get China,
who has really one of the only
relationships
left with North Korea, along
perhaps a little
bit with Russia, to not only
engage, but also
to take tougher action to take
away some of
the goodies that they still
provide to North
Korea.
GWEN IFILL: And, finally,
Siegfried Hecker,
your take on Kim Jong-un and
whether he is
a real threat in this situation.
SIEGFRIED HECKER: So, I like to
be able to
say that I am just a scientist,
and so these
diplomatic matters are certainly
beyond my
own personal reach.
But the thing that seems clear,
just in terms
of the nuclear weapons piece of
this, is that
North Korea looks at these
nuclear weapons
as a deterrent. During all of my
visits and
the discussions with their
Foreign Ministry
and the diplomats, rather than
the technical
people, they talked about their
deterrent.
So the emphasis was always
deterrent, meaning
deterring the United States from
essentially,
you know, going into North
Korea, or, as they
like to say, you know, our
hostile policies.
So, I think we need to
understand exactly
what is the North Korean
security concern,
because without getting over
that concern,
in North Korea, to come to
resolution, it
seems to me -- and, again, not
being a diplomat
-- that the issue is much bigger
than just
the nuclear issue. And so
focusing on the
nuclear issue by itself is not
going to be
able to get us there.
GWEN IFILL: Siegfried Hecker,
former director
of the Los Alamos Laboratory,
and Wendy Sherman,
many former titles, but you were
former undersecretary,
most recently, of political
affairs at the
Department of State.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: Thank you both very
much.
WENDY SHERMAN: Thank you.
SIEGFRIED HECKER: Thank you very
much. It's
my pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: 2015 turned out
to be a boom
year for the auto industry,
despite some of
JUDY WOODRUFF: 2015 turned out
to be a boom
year for the auto industry,
despite some of
the worst news about its
practices in recent
years.
Americans spent roughly $570
billion on 17.5
million cars and trucks last
year, an almost
6 percent increase over the
prior year, and
breaking a record set 15 years
earlier.
But, in the same 12 months, GM
faced public
congressional hearings and paid
a $900 million
settlement over its handling of
a defective
ignition switch. U.S. regulators
recalled
more than 19 million vehicles
over faulty
air bags, and Volkswagen
admitted to rigging
diesel cars to pass emissions
tests.
Some insight into this from
David Shepardson
of Reuters news service. He
covers the automotive
industry, as well as other
regulatory matters.
And welcome back to the program.
DAVID SHEPARDSON, Reuters:
Thanks, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Dave, should
we be surprise
at this jump in auto sales last
year?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: No, I think
it's continuing
a record-setting six-year trend,
really the
longest increase in auto sales
since the 1920s.
But it says Americans, our cars
in the garages
are still pretty old, a record
11.5 years
on average. And there's been a
lot of pent-up
demand. Plus, you have got low
gas prices,
low interest rates, and a lot of
good deals
on -- in showrooms. And
Americans are feeling
more confident. Unemployment has
declined.
So, really, all the economic
indicators that
would help boost sales have been
in the auto
companies' favor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I want to ask
you about
some of those factors.
But this happened, as we just
reported, despite
all this bad news about the
industry. What
does that say about consumers?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: It's pretty
remarkable that
consumers have shrugged off all
the bad news.
And, really, it's hard to keep
it straight,
from the air bags, to the fines
to companies
for not disclosing defects and
handling recalls
properly, not to mention
Volkswagen, Takata
and General Motors.
So, consumers have been able to
separate some
of those issues, especially
because they're
older vehicles not in the
showrooms, in part
they need cars and trucks, and
they're not
going to sort of wait for the
industry to
get all its practices back in a
row.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what does it
say, though,
I'm just curious, in terms of
the auto industry's
advertising and reaching out?
They were clearly
trying to put out the good
story, while some
of these other bad stories were
out there.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Right.
I think -- and also, with
recalls, remember,
we had a record 60 million
vehicles recalled
in 2014. Last year, 2015, was
the second highest.
I think there's a little recall
fatigue. Americans
can't keep tracks of all the
recalls. There
is an onslaught. So I think
people have sort
of said, yes, there are recalls,
yes, there
are issues, but I still need a
car and I'm
still confident in my brand or
the vehicle
I choose to buy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's
interesting, too, is
not just that people are buying
more cars,
but the kind of cars they're
buying, I mean,
bigger cars, SUVs. How do you
explain that?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Right, and not
cars at all.
In fact, as car sales declined,
and SUVs and
pickups and crossovers have
spiked dramatically.
Take GM. GM sold -- just 30
percent of all
vehicles in the U.S. last year
were cars.
And 70 percent were trucks, SUVs
and crossovers.
Because these crossovers are
car-based SUVs,
get pretty good gas mileage, but
they have
the utility for people to haul
more stuff
around, get more kids in the
back or dogs,
or what have you, people have
just shifted
away from cars. And, as a
result, the -- it's
a big concern. Will people be
able to -- will
the auto companies be able to
meet these fuel-efficiency
standards?
Remember, the administration has
proposed
doubling them to 55 miles per
gallon by 2025.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because we know
the price of
gas is down, but these are
vehicles that gobble
up more fuel.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Exactly.
They are more fuel-efficient
than predecessors,
but they still do use more fuel
than cars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Dave, what about
the industry,
the health of the industry
overall? Does this
say that this is an industry
that's out of
its slump and is going to stay
strong for
some time, or is this a
temporary thing? What's
your reading on that?
DAVID SHEPARDSON: It is a strong
industry.
And all the analysts think sales
in 2016 are
going to go back up, although
there are some
warning signs. Interest rates
are going to
start to rise again.
There are a lot of used cars,
cars coming
off leases that will go back on
the market,
which is a concern. Will used
car prices go
down, make people less likely to
buy new cars?
But the bigger threat is the
massive disruption
from Silicon Valley coming to
the auto industry
through Google and autonomous
cars, Tesla,
Apple potentially?
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mean the
self-driving cars,
cars with batteries, still a
small part of
the market, but...
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Yes, right,
but down the
road, fully electric cars with
batteries with
longer ranges. People will feel
more confident
in buying those cars. And,
presumably, gas
prices will go back up.
But the big question is, will
people ultimately
completely revisit how they use
cars for personal
mobility? Will they share cars,
not just in
big cities? Will they not want
to own a car?
Cars sit in driveways and
garages and are
not used 90 percent of the time.
Should people
-- are people willing to share
cars and not
perhaps actually take it home
from the dealership?
And so the industry is preparing
for a major
disruption in the current way we
buy and sell
cars.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Presumably
spending a lot of
time trying to figure out the
answers to all
those questions.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: And stay in
business and
do it profitably.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Shepardson
with Reuters,
thank you.
DAVID SHEPARDSON: Thanks, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
life in Mexico
after deportation; and using
cardboard to
help children with disabilities.
But, first, payday lending is a
$46 billion
industry in the U.S. About 12
million Americans
borrow more than $7 billion
annually from
over 22,000 storefronts.
But the industry's practices
have long been
under scrutiny.
Special correspondent Andrew
Schmertz has
the story from South Dakota,
part of our ongoing
reporting initiative Chasing the
Dream: Poverty
and Opportunity in America.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Living paycheck
to paycheck
isn't easy. Sometimes, you have
to come up
with creative ways to relieve
the stress.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN, South Dakota:
A good way
to just live in denial is just
throw away
your bills. I know I can't pay
them anyway,
so...
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Kristi
McLaughlin and her
husband, T.J., were getting by
on T.J.'s salary
as a manufacturing plant manager
here in Sioux
Falls, South Dakota, that was,
until T.J.
got sick.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN, South Dakota: I
was working
the night shift, and I was on my
feet a lot.
And I had a couple of wounds
start developing
on my leg. And they were pretty
small at first,
and then they got infected and
just started
growing.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: When T.J. went
to get treatment,
the doctor said it would only
take a day,
but, in fact, he ended up
missing a whole
week of work.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: They ended up
docking my
pay. We ended up being short on
bills. I panicked,
so...
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: So McLaughlin
came here,
a title loan place just a few
miles from his
home. He says the process was
simple and quick.
They inspected his car and then
handed him
$1,200 in cash. He agreed to pay
$322 a month
for a year.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: I was making
good money.
I didn't really foresee a
problem paying it
back at that time.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But then his
leg got worse,
and he had to go back to the
hospital for
another week.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: And on
Wednesday of the
following week, the H.R. person
called from
his job and fired him, and, on
that day, we
pretty much lost everything.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But not the
loan. After nine
months, the total amount they
owed grew from
$1,200 to over $3,000. That's an
annual interest
rate of more than 300 percent.
Title loans and payday loans are
supposed
to be short-term quick fixes for
people who
can't get traditional credit.
ACTRESS: Do you need fast cash?
You have come
to the right place.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: They use
high-energy commercials
and bank-like storefronts to
entice people
to borrow money at triple-digit
interest rates.
The problem? They are rarely
short-term. Borrowers
frequently need to take out a
second loan
to pay off the first one. It's
called flipping.
STEVE HICKEY (R), Former South
Dakota State
Legislator: The average payday
loan in the
United States is flipped eight
times. And
they are a debt trap that's
intentionally
marketed to the financially
unsophisticated,
intending to lock them in on
something that
they can't pay back.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Former state
lawmaker Steve
Hickey tried to rein in the
industry, which
charges an average of 574
percent, with legislation
to cap interest rates. But he
could never
get his bills out of committee.
STEVE HICKEY: Just not much
stomach in the
legislature, because the
financial sector
in our state is such a huge
deal. There's
millions and millions at stake.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: South Dakota
has been the
epicenter of high interest since
the 1980s,
when the state repealed laws
capping rates
to attract jobs from credit card
companies
like Wells Fargo and Citibank.
STEVE HICKEY: The purpose at
that time was
to bring in 400 Citibank jobs,
not to bring
in 400 percent interest rates.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Hickey wasn't
alone in recognizing
the problems created by these
short-term loans.
Steve Hildebrand runs Josiah's
coffee shop
here in Sioux Falls. He's seen
the detrimental
effects of these high interest
rates firsthand.
STEVE HILDEBRAND, South Dakotans
for Responsible
Lending: I have had employee
after employee
after employee over the last
three years in
the coffee shop, going through
horrible, horrible
financial experiences, taking
out these emergency
loans, and just getting into
this terrible
cycle of debt that is incredibly
hard for
them to get out of.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Hildebrand, an
openly gay
Democrat who worked on the Obama
campaign,
didn't have much in common with
Hickey, a
Republican and conservative
Christian pastor
who has railed against
homosexuality, but
they did see eye to eye on what
they consider
predatory lending.
STEVE HICKEY: We created a
campaign called
South Dakotans for Responsible
Lending. Steve
and I are chair and co-chair.
It's brought
people on the right and the left
together
in a very healthy way.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: They decided to
use a tactic
that was born right here in the
Mount Rushmore
state in 1898, the ballot
initiative.
REYNOLD NESIBA, South Dakotans
for Responsible
Lending: And you're registered
to vote in
South Dakota?
WOMAN: Yes.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Reynold Nesiba
is a volunteer
gathering signatures to put a
measure on the
ballot that would do what
lawmakers could
not: cap interest rates on all
loans at 36
percent.
REYNOLD NESIBA: And I feel so
strongly about
this that I'm the treasurer of
this campaign,
so that's my name on the bottom.
If you're
registered to vote, I would love
to have your
signature.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: The goal? To
get well more
than the 13,871 signatures
required to put
the issue in front of voters
next November.
With millions of dollars in
revenue at stake,
the lending industry is strongly
opposed to
any new regulation.
Two-thirds of U.S. states allow
some form
of high-interest-rate loans, and
when similar
initiatives have sprung up in
other states,
the industry has fought back.
Here in South
Dakota, the lending industry is
fighting back
using a ballot initiative
itself.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: They were
putting forward
an 18 percent rate cap in order
to convince
people they should sign that
one, instead
of the 36, because 18 sounds
better than 36,
right?
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: By that
initiative comes
with a catch. It only caps rates
at 18 percent
-- quote -- "unless the borrower
agrees to
another rate in writing,"
meaning if the borrower
wants the loan, they have to
agree to whatever
terms the lender demands.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: So, the 18
percent rate
cap is just a fake cap.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Teams of paid
circulators
have been out across the state
gathering signatures
for that petition. None were
willing to speak
with us on camera, and repeated
requests for
comment went unanswered.
When asked about capping rates
at 36 percent,
the one payday lender who did
speak with us
was unequivocal.
CHUCK BRENNAN, CEO, Dollar Loan
Center: It's
a kill-bill for the state. The
entire lending
industry would be out of
business with it.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Chuck Brennan,
a Sioux Falls
native, is the founder and CEO
of Dollar Loan
Center, a chain of more than 90
short-term
lending stores, with 11
locations in South
Dakota.
CHUCK BRENNAN: We have a huge
customer base.
In South Dakota, we have had
over 40,000 applicants
for loans over the years. Over
20 percent
of the state who is over 18 has
applied for
a loan here, which really shows
there's a
need for the product out there.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Further,
Brennan says a rate
cap will actually harm the
people it is intended
to help.
CHUCK BRENNAN: It isn't like
when the industry
goes out of business people are
going to stop
needing money. They're going to
have to turn
to online loans, illegal
sources, and something
that the state can't regulate.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But Hickey
says, in reality,
there are plenty of ways to help
people who
need money without charging them
triple-digit
interest.
STEVE HICKEY: As an employer
with employees,
I would give a payday advance. I
know Steve
Hildebrand does at his coffee
shop. He will
lend somebody money on their
paycheck at zero
percent interest, and maybe
there could even
be regulation on that. Four
times a year,
it's an employee benefit.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: After months of
hard work,
the campaign gathered over
20,000 signatures
for Hildebrand to deliver to the
secretary
of state. But the opposing
lender-supported
campaign also managed to gather
enough signatures
to get on the ballot.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: The payday
lenders are going
to spend millions of dollars on
television
trying to confuse voters and
misrepresent
our side.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: So, the fight's
not over.
Hildebrand has one year to
convince South
Dakotans to vote for his
interest rate cap.
In the meantime, T.J. ended up
losing his
fight to save his leg. It was
amputated six
months after he lost his job.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: It needs to
go at least
to there.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: T.J. and Kristi
are now focused
on rehab, instead of the title
loan.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: I told them
to come and
get the car. Take it. You know,
our world
has fallen out from underneath
us, and if
you want it that badly, come and
get it.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Over
Thanksgiving, the lender
repossessed their car.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: People get
sick. And, you
know, if it's serious enough,
they can lose
everything. We lost everything
in a matter
of a week, it seems like.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: T.J. and Kristi
may have
to find their way out of this
devastation
on their own. But they hope, by
speaking out,
they can at least save other
South Dakotans
from becoming trapped in a
nightmare of high
interest rates.
For the "PBS NewsHour," Andrew
Schmertz in
Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
Now Hari Sreenivasan takes a
broader look
at the problems lower-income
Americans face
when it comes to getting the
money they need.
HARI SREENIVASAN: South Dakota
isn't the only
place where payday loans are
such a big problem.
While a few states have banned
or imposed
strict regulations on these
fringe lenders,
they're ubiquitous in most of
the country.
In fact, there are more payday
lending storefronts
than there are Starbucks and
McDonald's combined.
In her book "How the Other Half
Banks," Mehrsa
Baradaran explores the booming
industry providing
financial services to the poor
at exorbitant
costs and offers some more
equitable solutions.
Thanks for joining us.
So, why -- where is this gap
created? And
why isn't there an incentive for
all banks
to reach out to all people with
money?
MEHRSA BARADARAN, Author, "How
the Other Half
Banks": The gap is fairly new.
So, starting in the 1980s, a lot
of community
banks started shutting down
branches in lower-income
areas, inner-city neighborhoods,
areas where
their profit margins were lower
than in other
areas. And so part of it is,
it's higher cost
to lend to someone or to take a
small deposit
than it is to get a big deposit.
Right? Your
overhead is the same whether
you're, you know,
taking in $100,000 vs. taking in
$500, but
your revenue off of that
$100,000 is much
higher than it is off of that
small deposit.
And so these banks started
leaving these areas.
And part of it is that the
government deregulatory
forces allowed them to merge and
form these
huge conglomerates such as Bank
of America.
So, as these banks leave, they
leave this
void for banking service. And
this is a void
that quickly is filled by these
fringe lenders,
so payday loans, check cashing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, when you
go through
certain cities, just like there
are food deserts
where you don't have a grocery
store, it seems
like there are almost bank
deserts, where
it's populated primarily with
these lenders
that you're talking about.
How much money is there to be
made?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It's an $89
billion industry
yearly. And it doesn't seem that
way.
So, when you go into these
neighborhoods,
these check cashers or payday
lenders, they
seem like neighborhood joints.
But they're
really sort of multinational
corporations.
They're large, very profitable
organizations.
And they have this, what I call
a facade of
informality, right? So it seems
as though,
look, they speak your language.
They're in
your neighborhood, but, really,
behind them,
there is a lot of bank
financing. These are
very sort of corporate, big, big
firms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: These
companies are going
to say, look, I'm taking a
greater risk. This
is a person that is not as
creditworthy as
someone who maybe walks into a
Bank of America
with a much larger amount of
assets, right,
so shouldn't I be able to charge
a higher
interest rate to get them this
money fast?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It is
certainly a higher
risk to lend to someone who's
low-income.
However, there's a lot of
studies to show
that the price that they're
actually charging
isn't the cost of the loan. It's
also fairly
misleading when you compare it
to the credit
markets that the middle class
and higher income
have access to.
And one of the big points of the
book is,
even assuming that this is a
market price
that they're charging and it is
the cost of
credit because of the risks and
the defaults,
et cetera, the rest of us don't
pay market
prices for credit.
The credit markets, whether it's
for our mortgages,
our student loans, any sort of
bank credit
you get is heavily subsidized by
the federal
government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The book is
called "How
the Other Half Banks."
Mehrsa Baradaran, thanks so much
for joining
us.
MEHRSA BARADARAN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S.
Department of Homeland
Security conducted a series of
raids over
New Year's weekend on
undocumented immigrants
in a number of states, including
Georgia,
North Carolina and Texas.
Federal officials said they have
taken more
than 100 people into custody,
most of whom
arrived in the U.S. within the
past two years,
and are now awaiting
deportation.
But immigration groups are
fighting back,
and the nation's highest
immigration court
issued a ruling last night to
delay some of
the deportations.
Even before these moves,
hundreds of thousands
of undocumented immigrants were
being deported
annually. And for those who grew
up in the
U.S., that means they have found
themselves
living in what feels like a
foreign country.
Special correspondent Fred de
Sam Lazaro reports
from Mexico.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Miguel
Ramirez works in
Mexico City, and an almost daily
ritual is
to call his mother in Saint
Louis. He lived
there too, until he was deported
three years
ago, and banned for life from
ever reentering
the U.S.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ, Returnee: She's
-- she's devastated,
you know?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The shy
23-year-old, brought
to the U.S. by his mother as a
young child,
admits he fell in with the wrong
crowd. He
got caught in a burglary and his
sentence
was community service, until:
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: I get a note
from the judge
telling me that, because you're
an illegal
immigrant, you don't qualify for
this program,
and you're going to have to
start doing your
time.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most of his
time was actually
done in immigrant detention
centers before
he was dropped off at the
Mexican border.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: That, to me, was
rough. It
was one of the roughest things
ever. But,
I mean, I had to accept it. I
had no choice.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Ramirez is
one of several
young Mexican returnees profiled
in a book
called "Los Otros Dreamers" by
scholar and
social activist Jill Anderson.
Some have committed felonies,
she says, but
the vast majority have no
criminal history
or just minor infractions.
JILL ANDERSON, Author, "Los
Otros Dreamers":
For many, it's contact with
their local police
for anything from underage
drinking, accusations
from a neighbor or friends. One
young woman
was baby-sitting and had a
problem with the
family.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: In 2012,
President Obama
issued an executive order that
allowed the
children of undocumented
workers, many of
whom had grown up in the United
States, the
option to remain.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Specifically for certain young
people sometimes
called dreamers.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The order
came after Congress
rejected similar legislation
called the DREAM
Act. And it came after perhaps a
half-million
young Mexicans were either
deported or chose
to return.
WOMAN: This was a cute guy I had
a crush on
in my freshman year.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viridiana
and Maggie belong
to Los Otros Dreamers, or the
Other Dreamers,
a group that mostly meets
online, brought
together by Anderson's book.
Viridiana says, growing up in
Iowa, she felt
no stigma over her illegal
status.
VIRIDIANA, Returnee: My parents
always told
me, never tell anyone that we're
here undocumented.
I mean, at first, it was just
kind of like,
OK, I'm young and who cares?
Like, I mean,
what's so -- what's wrong in
being undocumented?
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: It was no
big deal growing
up, she says, until:
Dad goes to work one day and...
VIRIDIANA: Never comes home.
They went to
his workplace, and they took
him.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Twenty-two
years after
he arrived and settled quietly
in small-town
Iowa, Juan Vargas (ph) was
arrested and deported.
That brought abrupt, wrenching
decisions for
others in the family.
VIRIDIANA: My older sister, she
-- she decided
to stay in the United States,
and I totally
understand that. It is my home
too. I do miss
it, but, you know, I would
rather stay with
my parents.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Viridiana
quit her job
and, with her mother, returned
to Mexico,
against her father's wishes.
VIRIDIANA: He said: "I don't
want you here.
I don't want you to be here.
Just stay home."
FRED DE SAM LAZARO:
Twenty-five-year-old Maggie
got the same advice from her
parents. Home
for her was Dalton, Georgia,
where she too
felt no different from her wide
circle of
friends until high school.
MAGGIE, Returnee: I wanted to go
to work.
I wanted to find scholarships.
That's when
things started to -- wait, so
you're different?
That's when I started to
actually recognize
I was undocumented and that I
wasn't -- I
didn't have the same
opportunities.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Lacking
money to go to
college or get a legal,
good-paying job, she
decided, agonizingly, to move to
Mexico, a
country she'd left at age 3.
MAGGIE: My parents stayed. I
came by myself
at 18. And it was during -- this
month, it
was like if somebody had died
inside of me,
because it was like, OK, bye,
house, bye,
church, bye, friends, bye,
school, bye, dog.
I mean, I wasn't prepared.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Mexico
wasn't prepared
for her or other returnees
either. Until recently,
U.S. education credentials were
not even recognized.
Aside from official
indifference, Viridiana
says there's social stigma and
suspicion that
they are criminal deportees.
VIRIDIANA: Why are you back?
That's like the
first thing that they ask. Why
are you back?
What is the problem? They treat
us like crap.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Author Jill
Anderson:
JILL ANDERSON: They realize,
wow, I thought
I was Mexican. I don't talk like
a Mexican
because of my accent when I
speak Spanish.
People actually will call me
pocho or gringo,
and question as to why I'm even
here.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: There is one
industry
that is happy they're here: call
centers,
whose operators speak American
English.
WOMAN: I get to meet people from
all over
the United States when they call
my employer
with their customer service
questions.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Call centers
have proliferated
across Mexican cities, their
promotional videos
like this one on the Internet
geared to American
customers. It's one of few
places where returnees
can find work. They even waived
the requirement
of a high school diploma for
Miguel Ramirez,
and he says they pay a decent
wage.
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: This job is very
tedious.
You feel like you're getting
nowhere. It doesn't
make me feel very successful or
proud of myself,
to be honest with you. I want to
do something
more.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Call centers
do report
a high turnover. And living in
Mexico, where
many people struggle with life's
more basic
needs, Viridiana says it was
hard for her
to deal with what she saw as
trivial concerns.
VIRIDIANA: I couldn't handle the
calls. I
was just like, oh, my God, like,
these people
that -- why are they just
complaining about
their dish service? Like,
really? And then
I'm thinking like, girl, you
used to be one
of those dish people that would
call and be
like, what is wrong with you?
Your service
sucks.
(LAUGHTER)
VIRIDIANA: Like, that really
bothers me, and
I cannot do this job.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She now
works as a transportation
dispatcher and lives with her
parents. Her
mother, Patrice Hidalgo, says,
on a fraction
of their former income, life
here is difficult.
PATRICE HIDALGO, Returnee
(through translator):
Here, because of my age I can't
get a job.
And the security situation is
not good. It's
much worse now in Mexico than it
was before
we left.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And the
security situation
along the migration routes to
the U.S., now
overrun by gangs trafficking in
drugs and
people, keeps many from fleeing
Mexico again.
Do you ever contemplate going
back to the
United States illegally?
MIGUEL RAMIREZ: I do. I do
contemplate it,
not a lot, because there's a
risk.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: For her
part, Maggie got
a job teaching English, and she
attends college,
hoping to get into tourism
promotion.
MAGGIE: I want to travel more in
this country.
I know it's beautiful. I know it
has many
positive things. And I'm
starting to see that
beautiful side of Mexico.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: And she
plans to visit
the U.S. again, and often, only
now with passport
and visa.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this is
Fred de Sam
Lazaro in Leon, Mexico.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fred's reporting
is a partnership
with the Under-Told Stories
Project at the
University of St. Thomas in
Minnesota.
GWEN IFILL: Now to an inspiring
story about
one of last year's MacArthur
grant winners
and how design can change lives.
Special correspondent Jackie
Judd reports
for our Breakthroughs series on
innovation
and invention.
JACKIE JUDD: In the hands of
Alex Truesdell,
a simple piece of cardboard
turns into a world
of possibilities. Her life's
mission began
by accident.
Truesdell was rooting around in
a closet at
a school where she was teaching
and found
a chair that had been made for a
disabled
adult.
ALEX TRUESDELL, Founder,
Adaptive Design Association:
The armrest and the footrest on
it were actually
at different heights on the left
side than
the right side. And I asked
about it, and
they said, oh, that's made of
cardboard. And
I think my head exploded.
JACKIE JUDD: Why did your head
explode?
ALEX TRUESDELL: The idea that
you could take
that material and turn it into
what you needed,
that, if you needed something,
you could make
something.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell has been
making something
ever since with her triple-ply
cardboard,
glue and simple tools. In New
York City, at
the Adaptive Design Association,
which she
founded, cardboard furniture and
learning
tools are built for children
with disabilities.
ALEX TRUESDELL: It makes the
child, one, believe
in their own capacity, and then
everyone who
knows and loves the child
believe in what
they're able to do. I think it
upends the
prognosis, because, so often,
unfortunately,
the word disability signals
broken, can't,
isn't.
JACKIE JUDD: Creating this very
individualized
furniture often involves a house
call. In
suburban New Jersey,
21-month-old Austin Kellenberger
is getting his first fitting for
a chair and
a table.
JOHN KELLENBERGER, Father of
Austin: Austin
has significant motor
development issues.
He has difficulty even moving
his arm.
JACKIE JUDD: Today, even as a
toddler, dad
John Kellenberger says, Austin
feels apart
from his twin brother and older
sister.
JOHN KELLENBERGER: Oftentimes,
my other son,
Dylan (ph), and my daughter,
Savannah (ph),
will be playing at the table
with toys. He's
not able to do that. So, you do
see he is
very frustrated. He wants to --
he's a very
social boy. He wants to be part
of the group.
JACKIE JUDD: This furniture is
supposed to
make that possible, to make
Austin feel less
different and to build his
physical strength.
ALEX TRUESDELL: Right now, he
fatigues quickly,
but he hasn't had the right
chair in order
to build strength. So, the
angles of this
will actually give him a bit of
a challenge.
JACKIE JUDD: Cardboard is
relatively inexpensive,
readily available and really
sturdy, a trifecta
for growing kids and for
families, often burdened
by medical costs, who are asked
for contributions
of just $500.
Austin's chair is measured, and
measured again,
and cut to within an eighth of
an inch, so
it is just exactly right for the
little boy.
ALEX TRUESDELL: We need a custom
fit in an
off-the-rack world. And if it
doesn't fit,
if the child struggles, and
they're already
struggling, it's going to use up
that energy
and be discouraging. And then
they or someone
else will give up, and get the
wrong idea
about the child's potential, as
opposed to
being inspired enough to change
the thing,
change the environment to make
it work.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell saw that
happen in
her own family, and it was a
life-changer.
Her uncle turned conventional
household tools
into something her aunt, who had
lost the
use of her hands, could
manipulate.
ALEX TRUESDELL: My uncle was
able to repurpose
things, bend things that were
too straight,
cut things that were too long,
connect things.
And that thought, that you could
engineer
change to suit her specific
needs, is really
the root of this.
JACKIE JUDD: The workshop has
turned out pieces
this year for more than 200 New
York area
kids, but many more children can
use them.
So, Alex Truesdell and her team
spend as much
time teaching as they do
designing and building.
In the last several years alone,
they have
led several hundred design
workshops and have
answered inquiries from around
the globe.
As a result, these cardboard
creations are
being built in about six U.S.
locations and
in countries as diverse as
India, Romania
and Peru.
ALEX TRUESDELL: We try to use
methods here
that could be used anywhere in
the world.
So, any technique, anything we
make, the materials
we use, we want other people to
see what we
do and copy it. We really are
trying to supply
the movement, so that we would
inspire imitation,
cooperation, and collaboration
throughout.
JACKIE JUDD: Truesdell sees some
children
only once and others throughout
their lives.
She met New York City teenager
Hannah Auchincloss
(ph) as a toddler, when Hannah's
mother, Tracy
Ehrlich, was struggling to find
a chair in
which Hannah could feed sitting
up.
TRACY EHRLICH, Mother of Hannah:
She couldn't
do any of those things, and she
was much too
small for conventional
wheelchairs.
JACKIE JUDD: So there was
nothing you could
have ordered online, or gone
into a medical
supply store and say, that's
what I need,
that's what would help her?
TRACY EHRLICH: No, absolutely
not, because
she was so young.
JACKIE JUDD: Ehrlich has lost
track of all
the pieces Truesdell has made
for Hannah,
and even some for her sisters,
so the family
feels bound together, instead of
separated
by Hannah's challenges. But some
pieces stand
out, like the bike, the scooter
and a beloved
rocking chair that Hannah can
get moving on
her own.
ALEX TRUESDELL: The experience
of moving herself
at just -- one thing she can
really control
every day.
TRACY EHRLICH: I think that all
of the different
pieces of equipment have opened
up the possibilities
for her, the opportunities for
her to interact
with her world, interact with
the people who
are around her.
JACKIE JUDD: In New Jersey,
Austin Kellenberger
is just beginning to interact
with his world.
His furniture has been
delivered. And what
most see as a simple chair, his
parents, John
and Danielle (ph), see as
transformative.
JOHN KELLENBERGER: I want Austin
to reach
whatever the potential that he
has. I want
him to reach that. I don't know
what that
is. The doctors don't know what
that is at
this point. But whatever it is,
I want to
give him every chance to meet
that. And this
is one of the -- frankly, this
is one of the
things that's helping us do
that.
JACKIE JUDD: Alex Truesdell
started out as
a teacher for the blind. What
she has done
is let children, thousands of
them, see and
experience movement, growth and
confidence,
all through a simple piece of
cardboard and
a lot of ingenuity.
This is Jackie Judd in New York
for the "NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now for our
"NewsHour"
Shares, something that caught
our eye that
we thought might be of interest
to you too.
The U.S. Geological Survey on
Tuesday released
its first ever digital map of
the nation's
northernmost state. In vibrant
colors, it
reveals thousands of Alaska's
geological details
that can be used to contribute
to mineral,
energy, hazard, and other types
of scientific
assessments.
Shades of red represent areas
where rare-earth
elements, like those used in
electronics,
are most likely to be uncovered,
while green
represents the rocks where most
dinosaur fossils
are found. It took Frederic
Wilson, along
with a team of a dozen unpaid
retired scientists,
some 20 years to create. They
drew on more
than 750 references, some dating
back to the
early 1900s.
Scientists say a map like this
could help
identify new earthquake fault
zones and help
the oil and gas industry scope
out their next
big find.
GWEN IFILL: That's cool.
On the "NewsHour" online: El
Nino may be bringing
wild weather to the U.S., but it
could also
bring tropical diseases like the
mosquito-borne
dengue and Zika viruses. How do
warmer conditions
affect the rates of disease, and
which areas
are most susceptible? Read the
second in our
two-part science series. That's
at PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Never like that
picture.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": actor Samuel L. Jackson
on Quentin
Tarantino's new Western, "The
Hateful Eight."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.